Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules are informational molecules encoding the
genetic instructions used in the development and functioning of all known
living organisms and many viruses. Along with RNA and proteins, DNA is one of
the three major macromolecules that are essential for all known forms of life.
Genetic information is encoded as a sequence of nucleotides (guanine, adenine,
thymine, and cytosine) recorded using the letters G, A, T, and C. Most DNA
molecules are double-stranded helices, consisting of two long polymers of
simple units called nucleotides, molecules with backbones made of alternating
sugars (deoxyribose) and phosphate groups, with the nucleobases (G, A, T, C)
attached to the sugars. DNA is well-suited for biological information storage,
since the DNA backbone is resistant to cleavage and the double-stranded
structure provides the molecule with a built-in duplicate of the encoded
information.

These two strands run in opposite directions to each other and are therefore
anti-parallel, one backbone being 3' (three prime) and the other 5' (five
prime). This refers to the direction the 3rd and 5th carbon on the sugar
molecule is facing. Attached to each sugar is one of four types of molecules
called nucleobases (informally, bases). It is the sequence of these four
nucleobases along the backbone that encodes information. This information is
read using the genetic code, which specifies the sequence of the amino acids
within proteins. The code is read by copying stretches of DNA into the related
nucleic acid RNA in a process called transcription.

Within cells, DNA is organized into long structures called chromosomes. During
cell division these chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA
replication, providing each cell its own complete set of chromosomes.
Eukaryotic organisms (animals, plants, fungi, and protists) store most of
their DNA inside the cell nucleus and some of their DNA in organelles, such as
mitochondria or chloroplasts.[1] In contrast, prokaryotes (bacteria and
archaea) store their DNA only in the cytoplasm. Within the chromosomes,
chromatin proteins such as histones compact and organize DNA. These compact
structures guide the interactions between DNA and other proteins, helping
control which parts of the DNA are transcribed.
