Proteins are large biological molecules consisting of one or more chains of
amino acids. Proteins perform a vast array of functions within living
organisms, including catalyzing metabolic reactions, replicating DNA,
responding to stimuli, and transporting molecules from one location to
another. Proteins differ from one another primarily in their sequence of amino
acids, which is dictated by the nucleotide sequence of their genes, and which
usually results in folding of the protein into a specific three-dimensional
structure that determines its activity.

A polypeptide is a single linear polymer chain of amino acids bonded together
by peptide bonds between the carboxyl and amino groups of adjacent amino acid
residues. The sequence of amino acids in a protein is defined by the sequence
of a gene, which is encoded in the genetic code. In general, the genetic code
specifies 20 standard amino acids; however, in certain organisms the genetic
code can include selenocysteine and—in certain archaea—pyrrolysine. Shortly
after or even during synthesis, the residues in a protein are often chemically
modified by posttranslational modification, which alters the physical and
chemical properties, folding, stability, activity, and ultimately, the
function of the proteins. Sometimes proteins have non-peptide groups attached,
which can be called prosthetic groups or cofactors. Proteins can also work
together to achieve a particular function, and they often associate to form
stable protein complexes.

Like other biological macromolecules such as polysaccharides and nucleic
acids, proteins are essential parts of organisms and participate in virtually
every process within cells. Many proteins are enzymes that catalyze
biochemical reactions and are vital to metabolism. Proteins also have
structural or mechanical functions, such as actin and myosin in muscle and the
proteins in the cytoskeleton, which form a system of scaffolding that
maintains cell shape. Other proteins are important in cell signaling, immune
responses, cell adhesion, and the cell cycle. Proteins are also necessary in
animals' diets, since animals cannot synthesize all the amino acids they need
and must obtain essential amino acids from food. Through the process of
digestion, animals break down ingested protein into free amino acids that are
then used in metabolism.

Proteins may be purified from other cellular components using a variety of
techniques such as ultracentrifugation, precipitation, electrophoresis, and
chromatography; the advent of genetic engineering has made possible a number
of methods to facilitate purification. Methods commonly used to study protein
structure and function include immunohistochemistry, site-directed
mutagenesis, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry
